The essence of abstractions is preserving information that is relevant in a given context
, and forgetting information that is irrelevant in that context. - John Vogel Guttag

The key to understanding complicated things is knowing what not to look at. - Gerald Jay Sussman

Programs must be written for people to read, and only incidentally for machines to execute - Hal Abelson

When some field is just getting started and you don't really understand it very well
, it's very easy to confuse the essence of what you're doing with the tools that you use. - Hal Abelson

This is the approach of statified design, the notion that a complex system should be structured as a sequence of levels that are described using a sequence of languages.
Each level is constructed by combining parts that are regarded as primitive at that level, and the parts constructed at each level are used as primitives at the next level.
The language used at each level of a stratified design has primitives, means of combination, and means of abstraction appropriate to that level of detail.
- Hal Abelson

It is crucial that each procedure accomplishes an identifiable task that can be used as a module in defining other procedures - SICP

A user should not need to know how the procedure is implemented in order to use it. - SICP

We can encourage modular design by providing a library of standard components together with a conventional interface for connecting the components in flexible ways. - SICP

Since there are always different ways of expressing the same meaning, components that are logically compatible nevertheless evolve with mismatched interfaces.
Current software practices fail to exploit the compositional potential within existing code; they encourage from-scratch development and coupled code.
This is unfortunate, because much expense in software stems from many versions of similar things.
Multiplied code means multiplied complexity and multiplied costs. Invasive porting also risks introducing bugs to working code.
- Stephen Kell

I think that it's extraordinarily important that we in computer science keep fun in computing. When it started out, it was an awful lot of fun.
Of course, the paying customers got shafted every now and then, and after a while we began to take their complaints seriously.
We began to feel as if we really were responsible for the successful, error-free perfect use of these machines. I don't think we are.
I think we're responsible for stretching them, setting them off in new directions, and keeping fun in the house. I hope the field of computer science never loses its sense of fun.
Above all, I hope we don't become missionaries. Don't feel as if you're Bible salesmen. The world has too many of those already.
What you know about computing other people will learn. Don't feel as if the key to successful computing is only in your hands.
What's in your hands, I think and hope, is intelligence: the ability to see the machine as more than when you were first led up to it, that you can make it more.
- Alan Perlis